=head1 NAME

HTML::FormFu::Manual::Unicode - Working with unicode

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Working with unicode.

For a practical example, see the Catalyst application in the 
C<examples/unicode> directory in this distribution.

=head1 ASSUMPTIONS

In this tutorial, we're assuming that all encodings are UTF-8. It's 
relatively simple to combine different encodings from different sources, 
but that's beyond the scope of this tutorial.

For simplicity, we're also going to assume that you're using L<Catalyst> 
for your web-framework, L<DBIx::Class> for your database ORM, 
L<TT|Template> for your templating system, and YAML format C<HTML::FormFu> 
configuration files, with L<YAML::Syck> installed. However, the principles 
we'll cover should translate to whatever technologies you chose to work with.

=head1 BASICS

To make it short and sweet: you must decode all data going into your 
program, and encode all data coming from your program.

Skip to L</CHANGES REQUIRED> if you want to see what you need to do without 
any other explanation.

=head1 INPUT

=head2 Input parameters from the browser

If you're using C<Catalyst>, C<Catalyst::Plugin::Unicode> will decode all
input parameters sent from the browser to your application - see
L</Catalyst Configuration>.

If you're using some other framework or, in any case, you need to decode
the input parameters yourself, please take a look at
L<HTML::FormFu::Filter::Encode>.

=head2 Data from the database

C<DBIx::Class::UTF8Columns> will decode all input retrieved from the 
database - see L</DBIx::Class Configuration>.

=head2 Your template files

Set TT to decode all template files - see L</TT Configuration>.

=head2 HTML::FormFu's own template files

Set C<HTML::FormFu> to decode all template files - see 
L</HTML::FormFu Template Configuration>.

=head2 HTML::FormFu form configuration files

If you're using C<YAML> config files, your files will automatically be
decoded by C<load_config_file|HTML::FormFu/load_config_file> and
C<load_config_filestem|HTML::FormFu/load_config_filestem>, which
automatically sets C<< $YAML::Syck::ImplicitUnicode = 1 >>.

If you have L<Config::General> config files, your files will automatically
be decoded by C<load_config_file|HTML::FormFu/load_config_file> and
C<load_config_filestem|HTML::FormFu/load_config_filestem>, which
automatically sets L<Config::General's|Config::General> C<-UTF8> setting.

=head2 Your perl source code

Any perl source files which contain Unicode characters must use the
L<utf8> module.

=head1 OUTPUT

=head2 Data saved to the database

C<DBIx::Class::UTF8Columns> will encode all data sent to the database - see 
L</DBIx::Class Configuration>.

=head2 HTML sent to the browser

C<Catalyst::Plugin::Unicode> will encode all output sent from your 
application to the browser - see L</Catalyst Configuration>.

=head1 CHANGES REQUIRED

=head2 Catalyst Configuration

Add L<Catalyst::Plugin::Unicode> to the list of Catalyst plugins:

    use Catalyst qw( ConfigLoader Static::Simple Unicode );

=head2 DBIx::Class Configuration

Add L<DBIx::Class::UTF8Columns> to the list of components loaded, for each 
table that has columns storing unicode:

    __PACKAGE__->load_components( qw( UTF8Columns HTML::FormFu PK::Auto Core ) );

Pass each column name that will store unicode to C<utf8_columns()>:

    __PACKAGE__->utf8_columns( qw( lastname firstname ) );

=head2 TT Configuration

Tell TT to decode all template files, by adding the following to your 
application config in MyApp.pm

    package MyApp;
    use strict;
    use parent 'Catalyst';
    use Catalyst qw( ConfigLoader );
    
    MyApp->config({
        'View::TT' => {
            ENCODING => 'UTF-8',
        },
    });
    
    1;

=head2 HTML::FormFu Template Configuration

Make C<HTML::FormFu> tell TT to decode all template files, by adding the 
following to your C<myapp.yml> Catalyst configuration file:

    package MyApp;
    use strict;
    use parent 'Catalyst';
    use Catalyst qw( ConfigLoader );
    
    MyApp->config({
        'Controller::HTML::FormFu' => {
            constructor => {
                tt_args => {
                    ENCODING => 'UTF-8',
                },
            },
        },
    });
    
    1;

These above 2 examples should be combined, like so:

    package MyApp;
    use strict;
    use parent 'Catalyst';
    use Catalyst qw( ConfigLoader );
    
    MyApp->config({
        'Controller::HTML::FormFu' => {
            constructor => {
                tt_args => {
                    ENCODING => 'UTF-8',
                },
            },
        },
        'View::TT' => {
            ENCODING => 'UTF-8',
        },
    });
    
    1;

=head1 AUTHORS

Carl Franks C<cfranks@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

This document is free, you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the same terms as Perl itself.
